Mustard greens, like spinach, are the storehouse of many phyto-nutrients that have health promotional and disease prevention properties.
Leaf-mustard is very low in calories (26 calories per 100 g raw leaves) and fats. However, its dark-green leaves carry ample amounts of phyto-nutrients, vitamins, and minerals. Additionally, it contains very good amount of fiber that helps control cholesterol level by interfering with its absorption in the gut. Adequate fiber in the food aids in smooth bowel movements and thereby offers protection from hemorrhoids, constipation as well as colon cancer diseases.
The greens are supposed to be one of the highest among leafy vegetables which provide vitamin K. 100 g of fresh leaves contains about 497 µg or about 500% of daily requirement of vitamin K-1 (phylloquinone). Vitamin K has found to have a potential role in bone mass building function by promoting osteotrophic activity in the bone. It also has established role to play in Alzheimer's disease patients by limiting neuronal damage in their brain.
Mustard greens are rich source of anti-oxidants flavonoids, indoles, sulforaphane, carotenes, lutein and zea-xanthin. Indoles, mainly di-indolyl-methane (DIM) and sulforaphane have proven benefits against prostate, breast, colon and ovarian cancers by virtue of their cancer-cell growth inhibition, cytotoxic effects on cancer cells.
Fresh leaves are also a very good source of folic acid. 100 g provide about 187 µg (about 47% of RDA) of folic acid. This water-soluble vitamin has an important role in DNA synthesis, and cell division. When given to women during peri-conception time as a supplement, this vitamin may help prevent neural tube defects in their newborn babies.
Fresh mustard leaves are an excellent source of vitamin-C. Provides 70 µg or about 117% of RDA per 100 g. Vitamin-C (ascorbic acid) is a powerful natural anti-oxidant that offers protection against free radical injury and flu-like viral infections.
Mustard leaves are also incredible sources of vitamin-A (provide 10500 IU or 350% of RDA per 100 g). Vitamin A is an essential nutrient required for maintaining healthy mucus membranes and skin and is required for good eye-sight. Consumption of natural fruits rich in flavonoids helps to protect from lung and oral cavity cancers.
Fresh mustard greens are an excellent source of several essential minerals such as calcium, iron, magnesium, potassium, zinc, selenium, and manganese.
Regular consumption of mustard greens in the diet is known to prevent arthritis, osteoporosis, iron deficiency anemia and believed to offer protection from cardiovascular diseases, asthma and colon and prostate cancers.
