At 86 calories per 100 g, sugar corn kernels are moderately high in calories on comparison to other vegetables. However, fresh kernels have been much lower in calories than field corn and other cereals like wheat, rice, etc. Their calorie mainly comes from simpler carbohydrates like glucose, sucrose than complex sugars like amylose and amylopectin as in cereals.
Sweet corn is gluten-free cereal and may be used safely much like rice, quinoa, etc., in celiac disease individuals.
Corn features high-quality phyto-nutrition profile comprising of dietary fiber, vitamins, and antioxidants in addition to moderate proportions of minerals. It is one of the finest source dietary fibers; 100 g kernels provide 2 g or 5% of daily-requirement of dietary-fiber. Together with slow digesting complex carbohydrates; moderate amounts of fiber in the food regulate a gradual rise in blood sugar levels. However, corn, in line with rice, potato, etc., is one of the high glycemic index food items, limiting its role as the chief food ingredient in diabetes patients.
Yellow variety corn has significant levels of phenolic flavonoid pigment antioxidants such as ß-carotenes, and lutein, xanthins and cryptoxanthin pigments along with vitamin A. 100 g fresh kernels provide 187 IU or 6% of daily-requirement of vitamin-A. Altogether; these compounds are required for maintaining healthy mucus membranes, skin and vision. Consumption of natural foods rich in flavonoids helps to protect from lung and oral cavity cancers.
Corn is a good source of phenolic flavonoid antioxidant, ferulic acid. Several research studies suggest that ferulic acid plays vital role in preventing cancers, aging, and inflammation in humans.
It also contains good levels of some of the valuable B-complex group of vitamins such as thiamin, niacin, pantothenic acid, folates, riboflavin, and pyridoxine. Many of these vitamins function as co-factors to enzymes during substrate metabolism.
Further, it contains healthy amounts of some important minerals like zinc, magnesium, copper, iron, and manganese.
